All right, I wanted to start
with a quick primer on DSA,
data structures and algorithms.
This is the few minute version of what
is full courses for other people, right?
So, I'm definitely not
going deep into detail.
We will get into many of these topics and
come back to them as we code along, but
I just wanted to present for those of you
that maybe don't know some of the terms,
just so you have a little bit of
basic familiarity with the terms,
how they relate to each other.
These are the sorts of terms
that you go and google and
find the Wikipedia pages for.
And just read the first three paragraphs
of any Wikipedia page because beyond that,
it's probably too much depth for you.
But the first three paragraphs of any
one of these Wikipedia pages is probably
enough to get you a familiarity like,
okay,
I know where that's gonna fit into
the overall scheme of things.
Some common data structures to be aware
of, these may be familiar to many of you,
maybe not familiar to some of you, I just
picked a few of them that you definitely
wanna have on your radar screen and have
done some at least minimal research on.
Arrays.
We talked about that, the concept of
sequentially ordering a list of values,
they go by lots of different names,
lists, and arrays, and vectors and,
there's all kinds of subnuances and
caveats underneath each one of these.
But arrays are sequentially,
generally indexed order,
numerically indexed collections of values.
Stacks are most always built on top of
arrays, although they don't have to be
built on top of arrays, they can be built
on top of other primitive data structures.
But a stack is kind of like
an array with an additional
property which is that we only put on to
the end and we only take off of the end.
So if I start out with two
values in a stack, and
I want to take one value off,
I don't take the first item off,
I take the last item off cuz it's
last in first out, so called LIFO.
Last In First Out is
what we have with stacks.
Stacks are immensely
important to understand.
We use terminology like pushing and
popping, we push on to a stack,
my favorite visualization of
that is the stack of pancakes.
I got four pancakes, that's not enough.
Give me a fifth pancake,
you put a fifth pancake on top, okay?
And then I eat a pancake, and
then we've popped it off the stack, and
now I'm back to four, and
now I need a fifth one again.
Just tell the waiter,
always keep five pancakes on top.
Okay, so there's your stack, right?
And this is immensely
common in programming.
We'll see this over and
over and over again,
you'll hear that word stack over and
over again used, so be familiar with it.
Queues, similar to stack, but it's a first
in first out instead of last in first out.
In the queue world, again,
often implemented with an array,
can be implemented with other things
like linked lists and so forth.
But in a queue, the first thing that we
put in, no matter how much else we put in,
the first thing that we put in is
the thing we're gonna take out.
Queue being like a line.
Just think of it like a line at the,
waiting to get on a roller coaster.
Generally, we don't let
people cut in line, so
the next person in line is the one that
gets to get on the roller coaster.
Just think of it like that.
And again, we use those a lot,
we'll see queues today in use
in some of our algorithms.
These are kinda like Lego pieces that
you end up putting algorithms on top of.
So data structures are the mechanisms by
which we implement our various algorithms.
A couple of others,
we've got sets, so what is a set?
Again, often implemented as an array, but
can be implemented with other
primitive data structures,
sets are basically like, I want
an unordered collection that is unique.
unordered is important.
In arrays they're ordered.
So if you were implementing a set with
an array, you would actually have to go
to a little bit of extra trouble to make
it seem as if the array was set like,
because two sets with the same values in
a different order should be equivalent.
And two arrays with the values in
different orders would definitely be
different, right?
So you have to go to a little
bit of extra trouble, and
that might be why you didn't actually
implement a set with an array.
Maybe you implemented
it with something else.
Again, lots of choices there.
But sets are an unordered
collection of unique values.
Extremely helpful.
We will implement traversal algorithms and
talk about traversal algorithms,
where we need to remember that
we visited something before.
You throw it into a set and then you ask
the set, have I seen this thing before?
Extremely useful.
Could you do that with an array?
Of course you could.
We've got array, we've got array includes,
or index have or whatever, but
that's not the right tool for the job,
the right tool for the job is set.
Why?
Because you would not wanna just keep
throwing the same value into that array
over and over and have it grow and
grow and waste your memory.
A set's gonna make sure we only
have one copy of the thing.
I'll talk about map in a moment and
then we can answer the question about,
there's a question being asked about,
when would you use a map versus set?
They're very different data structures so,
you would almost never use one
interchangeably with the other.
They're for
very different types of problems.
Objects.
I throw that up here because it's a nice,
simple,
recognizable word for
key value data structure.
And by key, in JavaScript in particular,
we mean something like a string key.
So that's contrasted with
something like an array,
which is that the location of
the data is numerically indexed and
it's generally contiguous,
here in an object you can have string keys
that are not contiguous,
that aren't related in any way, whatever.
And so, you're probably familiar with
these sorts of things, JSON, objects,
or how most people kind of visualize this,
but an object is simply a place to
store some data in a collection and
give it a unique name, generally a string.
You technically can use numbers cuz
they just, string of I is the number for
the key but, usually you stick
to numeric indexing on arrays,
and string indexing on objects.
Now what's a map?
A lot of people get
confused object versus map.
Maps are very similar, but maps under
the covers fundamentally say we can use
any value as our key not simply a string.
And that is why there it gives rise
to the more formal concept which is
called a HashMap, what does that mean?
There's other terms that you'll find as
you google around for this but, a map has
to take any value, and if it's a string or
a number, it's really easy, right?
We just know where to store stuff if
we've got strings and numbers, or
at least we can think in our minds, I know
where I would probably store something
if the key was a number or a string.
But what if the key is a function?
Function's a weird value, what would I do?
Would I string of I the function or
whatever?
So there's this notion
of hashing something.
A hash is a one way mathematical
transform on a value,
that produces ideally a unique value.
Unfortunately, there's no perfect hashing,
so
we always have what's called collisions.
And the job of an implementer
of something like a HashMap is,
what do I do If two different values
I push through some transform, and
I get a hash to use as the key, and
both values end up with the same key?
They say end up with the same hash,
what do I do?
And so there's lots of different
strategies for how to deal with that.
You have these kind of
exotic data structures where
there's a hash key mechanism used to
do the single slot and that in it,
and at any given slot,
then it's simply an array,
a list of all the values that had
a collision in their key or something.
So, it's lots of different
complexities they're not relevant to
our discussion in this workshop, but
now understanding maps and sets,
you can see that in a set,
its key is completely irrelevant.
It's simply the inclusion in the data
structure, that's the only question
we want to ask of the data structure is,
does it have it or not?
I don't care where it is,
I don't care how you stored it,
I don't care how you implemented it,
just tell me, do you have it or not?
And ideally, also there needs
to only be one of it, right?
Don't ever let there be
more than one of it.
So the kinds of questions we'd ask,
like inclusion or
exclusion, is it there or
is it not, we'd ask that of a set,
you technically could ask that of a map,
like does it have the key,
but again, that's not the right data
structure for that kind of question.
So you often would not,
it's not to say that you couldn't and
sometimes we do stick a key into an object
to represent that we've seen it or
not seen it or whatever but,
usually only use something like a map or
a HashMap when you're going
to retrieve it by its index.
In a set you don't need to retrieve it
because you already have the value,
and you're asking,
is the value already in there?
But with, something like a map or
a HashMap, you wouldn't have the value but
you would have the key, you would have the
index, the property name, whatever, you
would have that, and you would be saying,
tell me what the value is for this thing.
So it's more of a lookup, as opposed
to an inclusion exclusion question.
Just different kinds of problems
that we solve they're both useful,
we do use them for different things.
Moving on, we've got trees and graphs,
trees are extremely common
we use them quite a bit.
And many people if pressed,
can't actually tell you what's
the difference between a tree and a graph.
They are very different, and some of
you listening probably are like, yeah,
they're used for very, very different
things, they have different properties.
What's interesting about the algorithms
that we are gonna look at, and
the algorithms that you're
likely to run across,
is that many times there is
a version of the algorithm for
kind of each of these different
classes of data structure.
So there are algorithms that work
on trees, that have an adaptation,
sometimes just a one-for-one,
and sometimes a slight tweak,
an adaptation that works on a graph.
But graphs are gonna throw more
complexity in, so the algorithm has to
generally be a little bit smarter to
handle, what am I doing with a graph?
And there's lots of different kinds of
graphs, there's directed and undirected,
there's cyclic and acyclic,
there's all kinds of stuff.
But generally, if you learn an algorithm
in a tree algorithm, there's at least some
way to apply that or translate that
concept over into the graph world.
So, what's the difference
between a graph and a tree?
A graph is going to allow all of
those sorts of multiple connections.
So, you can have multiple parents, one
node can have multiple inbound arrows if
you were drawing it out in your mind,
that's a graph.
In a tree,
the relationship is always unidirectional.
A child only has one parent,
it never has two parents.
So there's no such thing as cycles,
trees are inherently directed from parent
to child relationship, graphs are not
inherently directed, meaning that
the arrows have a certain way that they
go, but you can create directed trees.
I mean directed graphs, or
you can create kind of undirected,
uniconnected, universally
connected graphs.
So, some words that I've been spouting
out, words that you see here in the slide,
these are things,
if any of them are unfamiliar to you,
just make yourself a note, I should go and
read the first few paragraphs on
a Wikipedia page just to kinda get
a little bit more comfortable with them.
We'll see them in practice as we go.
There was a question here, yes?
>> Yeah, so if we look at the categories,
the array, set, queue, set,
object, map, and tree graph,
it's another way of thinking about
the differences between those groups.
You have a change in the permissiveness,
say, of ordering and indexing.
So, Array, stacks, queues, they're pretty
friendly to what you throw at them.
Sets, objects, and
maps are going to be much more reactive
to what you've tried to put in and
you have to know kinda how they're going
to behave and what you want out of them.
And trees and graphs are an absolute
mess if you don't go in with a plan.
Because they'll do anything you want and
the tree will turn into a graph,
so we have to have a way of accessing the,
we have to kind of an expectation for
ourselves to access the information,
cuz the data structures provide less
rules as you move from one to the next.
Is that a fair interpretation here?
>> I don't disagree with
any of what you said,
I think it's a pretty reasonable
way of summarizing things.
I won't take credit that I had any
deep thought exactly in exactly how
I categorized these or whatever,
but there is definitely
a difference between whether order
matters in the data structure or not.
That's one of the big characteristics that
will differentiate data structures, and
you see that array, stacks, and
queues order absolutely matters in set,
object, and
map order does not matter at all, in fact,
the concept of order
is somewhat undefined.
In trees, order absolutely matters and
in graphs It depends.
It depends on the kind of graph.
So ordering is certainly one of the
characteristics that we could distinguish
data structures with.
I think there are various other ones, but
I agree with your general interpretation
that that's a primary
characteristic to keep in mind.